---
layout: post
title: "IC Experiments with Managing in One Sleepless Night"
categories: others
---

After almost 8 years of working in tech as an engineer, I still don't understand what managers do.

I've had a fair variety of managers in my career, ranging from a startup founder who had zero skills in managing any humans to a corporate manager who is as clueless about my job as I am about his. I might be unique in my difficulty to relate to managers, and so far I have sounded like I really don't like them, but the truth is I feel pretty apathetic towards them (except when they waste my time that I would rather spend on technical tasks). I am so apathetic to my managers that they are usually not a source of unhappiness in my job, *even* when they don't understand my work and have no desire to promote me or when they are just straight up misogynistic (digression: the worst offenders of misogyny I encountered in my career have or had an Asian female partner.. and I am an Asian female 🤔). What I ultimately care about is that I am contributing to the important engineering problems and I am learning through that process, and it's largely a function of the company, product, and my fellow ICs, rather than my manager.

However, my apathy does not mean that I have no wants. Over the years, I have been thinking about how to build a productive and efficient team, and one that I love to work in. While I could have an impact on this as an IC, some of my ideas are better implemented by a manager. Before I delve into my specific wants, these are my assumptions/beliefs:

1. the ultimate goal of any team is the team's output, as opposed to an individual's fancy pants success. An individual's success should be promoted only to the degree that it helps the team's output
2. everyone can excel if put in the right environment or guided appropriately

Based on these beliefs at core, here are my wants.

1. **use the best online-first document sharing platform and have people write strictly on that platform.** One of the most important features to look for is search capability. Documents are useful. They are a way to scale an engineering team by not having your engineers verbally deliver tribal knowledge multiple times and making your engineers a little more expandable (they can't leave with your source code but will leave with your team's tribal knowledge). Another bonus: they also happen to be a great support material for promoting your engineers.
In general, I think writing how-tos and explanations on how some systems work is important. Initial design docs, proposals, and plans are good, but not as important in terms of building the long-term efficiency. I'm not saying you should not write these. You definitely should, have bigger audience to them, and allow async discussion. What I'm saying is people tend to put a lot more effort than they should, because these are the documents you write to "flex" and management often looks for these to measure their employees (it tends to get worse the more corporate the company becomes). But they are not the most important documents for an efficient team.
In order to make the best out of the expensive engineers' time spent on writing documents instead of code, you have to aggressively have people write in *one single place* and your platform should be able to *search*. When my company had a lot of good documents and when I asked my co-worker about something, they increasingly linked me to some documents, I started building the habit of looking for these myself. But even then, search was horrendous and I often end up asking my coworkers. Even when I KNOW I had relevant information somewhere, search was so bad I had to ask a co-worker for a link.
I understand search is hard because not enough people are search in the intra website/document sharing platform to train a good ranking model for these platforms to use (I'm making a conjecture that these products bother to rank with a machine learning model or elasticsearch, but it could just be basic string match.), but some of these platforms that companies decide to use were just never designed for online knowledge sharing. It should be very apparent when you realize you can't get rid of that useless margins in Google docs.
If you want your team to get more things done not just this week, but for the many years to come, pick the best online document sharing platform and have ICs write, especially the documents that will generate the stable revenue of clicks and engagement...

2. **remove hierarchy**

3. **make ICs study**

4. **measure more things about your ICs**

Building an efficient team means building a team that gets done the most with the least amount of money, and humans are the biggest expense in software engineering teams, so getting the most out of them is so important! 🤑 While senior and staff engineers are expensive, you would hardly guess that the output from a team of senior and staff engineers is going to be *proportionally* higher than a team of a mixed level of engineers to the total salary of each team. (Note here that I am not questioning the price. Market determines this, not some abusive union of staff engineers...) While the amount of experience is a factor in playing the "Moneyball" with your engineering team, my favorite team I have worked in in my career consisted of people with different strengths: we were good at math, deep learning, infrastructure, code performance, technical communication, etc., but none was necessarily the chief in multiple things. So how can I build a team where each individual is relatively cheap but as a whole creates an expensive output? You could just try to do your best in recruiting, but that's out of the scope of this post. Also, recruiting requires some amount of luck, especially because interviewing provides noisy signal and tends to test for weakness, not strength. So we have to work with people we already got! Where do we start? Start measuring the employees on more aspects. Of all times that I have given feedback to someone during the review cycle in my career, the questions have been vague at best: what does this person do well? what can this person improve on? I want these measurements to be more specific. Think about what you need in this team: project management, ongoing maintenance, agility, research/new feature, etc. What skills do you expect your ICs to have to get these done? Technical communication, planning, code quality, fast code review turnaround, knowledge in product, empathy with customers, qualitative/quantitative analysis skills, etc. Too often we measure things at high granularity, e.g., leadership, experience in fancy big impactful projects, and they seem hard to get. But if you actually decompose the more fine-grained qualities that you expect from someone that would score high on these high-mighty sounding qualities, you would soon see that they seem a lot more tangible and probably already present in your team.

Experience matters, but it does not guarantee you success. I know people that have been writing Python for longer than I have, but still see them define their class with `object`. Why? Because they were ensconced in their experience, but not look to learn from the new material. (This is a nitpicky thing, and it is absolutely no indication of their ability as a programmer, but it is an indication of them staying comfortable in their experience.)

5. **micromanage ICs' career**

Oftentimes, not always, an IC needs to excel in order to move to the next level in their career. Based on my experience, one is considered to excel not necessarily because they just do a great job within the realm of their immediate responsibility. One is considered to excel because she is demonstrating leadership (whatever that means), an expertise/fresh perspective absent in the team, etc. But almost all the times, this happens by accident, e.g., someone in your team just happens to have leadership charisma or likes to read tech blogs outside work, etc. If you value such people so much, why let them happen by accident, why not plan for them aggressively?

Let's back up a little bit and think what is the point of having someone get promoted in the team:

1. because promotions make ICs motivated and motivated ICs work harder/do not quit
2. because you need a diverse set of skills within the team, such as leadership, planning, execution (and oddly enough, different skill sets are expected at different levels)

The point I'm trying to draw is that if all the things we do in a tech organization at heart is to increase the output, you have to be able to tie this career and leveling shinanigans into output, and you manage people to increase output, not to haze them.

Too often, there are some expectation guidelines for each level, and you may talk about some things that you can do to be at the next level with the manager. But the action items are vague at most, especially compared to the details an IC would include in any technical task, and they are also mostly up to the ICs' discretion to execute. It's as if nobody actually believes these things will help the output of the team!

People have different amounts of aspiration, different views on work-life balance, extroversion/introversion, etc., but I believe everyone can level up if they find what they are particularly good at and market it well (assuming they want to do this). I'd like managers to micromanage people's careers more, make related tasks part of the team's weekly plan, so everyone is given the time and sense of accountability to execute them, as it is the case for technical tasks. Also, don't just say vague-ass things like "take more ownership"; demonstrate and give concrete examples and review weekly how they did in that regard. Also, if you tried to inspect these more frequently, you might realize the actual problem is something else. For example, the "ownership" issue might be more related to not advertising to the wide audience the fine extra details and tasks that the IC took care of or the prioritization that the IC did on his own to minimize the short-term scope, but if you don't analyze the situations frequently enough, the details get lost and the feedbacks end up more of a statement of impression.

These all might sound like a manager is meant to treat ICs like little kids when it comes to career. But we are already confined in a very hierarchical environment. Depending on the company, there were times when I was never invited into the quarterly planning meetings. Everything was decided by the product and engineering managers. ICs are already being told what to do. If a manager is truly an expert in "people" and an IC in tech, managers should be able to tell ICs what to do for their career with more details. It's frowned upon for managers to micromanage "tech" decisions, but that is because ICs want to micromanage those. If an IC is not micromanaging their career, managers should be able to step in and manage a least a bit more than what I have observed in my career so far.


I have had a quite a dismissive tone on what managers do, but there are a lot of baseline things that happen because managers do their job and therefore I did not feel compelled  to mention.

Now it sounds like I am very passionate about management. In reality, I am too soft-spoken and short-sighted for any manager to think I'm fit for the job. I am also unqualified to be a manager; I have a real hard time focusing in big and abstract meetings. I have made my share of observations and formed opinions over time. One night, I couldn't fall asleep, and these thoughts on building a great engineering team were running through my head.

Should I share these opinions as concretely with my managers? No, not at all. When I leave a company, some of my manager tell me they wish I had mentioned my concerns earlier. Dude, I would have if I had a forum in which I could affect your promotion and salary, but only you do. As a practical person, I have to care about what you think I should do, but you don't have to take my suggestions as seriously. 70% honesty would be my max with my favorite manager.
